---
title: Bio vs. Organic Wines
subtitle: 'Green Pleasure: What are Organic and Bio Wines?'
description: Discover the differences between bio and organic wines, their production methods, and how these impact taste. Ideal for wine enthusiasts and professionals alike.
tags:
  - organic
  - bio
date: 2024-07-26T06:03:07.000Z
featured: true
---

Wine is not just pleasure, but also a reflection of the culture and nature from which it originates. In recent years, the demand for sustainably produced wines has steadily increased, leading to a greater spread of organic and bio wines. But what do these terms actually mean, and how do organic wines differ from bio wines?

In this article, we explore the essential differences and similarities between organic and bio wines.

## What is Organic Wine?

Organic wines are made from grapes grown without the use of synthetic chemicals such as pesticides, herbicides, and artificial fertilizers. Instead of chemicals, winemakers use natural methods and materials to maintain the health of the soil and plants.

Here are some key points:

- **Plant Protection:** Organic winemakers rely on natural pest control methods, such as using beneficial insects (e.g., ladybugs) and plant extracts.
- **Fertilization:** Instead of chemical fertilizers, they use organic materials such as compost, manure, or cover crops.
- **Soil Care:** Through crop rotation and gentle soil cultivation, soil fertility and biodiversity are maintained and promoted.

Just because a wine is organic doesn't automatically mean it is _vegan_.

[More about vegan wines can be found here.](/en/blog/wines/vegan-wines)

## What is Bio Wine?

The term "bio wine" goes beyond the cultivation of grapes and also refers to the winemaking process in the cellar. To be certified as bio wine, both the vineyard and the winery must adhere to strict guidelines set by certifying organizations such as the EU Organic Regulation or national bio associations. The main features include cultivation, winemaking, and sulfur use. Generally, a bio wine can be recognized by the European organic logo on the wine label.

Like organic wines, the grapes for bio wine must be grown without synthetic chemicals. No fungicides, pesticides, or herbicides are allowed. There are also strict rules for the processing of the grapes and the winemaking process. For example, only certain additives and processing aids are permitted. The amount of added sulfur, a common preservative, is usually more strictly regulated in bio wines than in conventional wines. Genetically modified cultured yeasts are also not allowed.

Whether bio wine or organic wine, it's important to note that these labels do not guarantee a quality wine - they provide information about the production method, not about the quality of the wine.

## Expert Opinion

Jens Priewe, wine journalist and author, explains the topic as follows:

_"In biological-organic viticulture, only biological plant protection products are allowed, and herbicides and synthetic (chemical) pesticides are generally prohibited. Instead, soil health, biodiversity, the use of plant strengthening agents and beneficial insects, as well as the greening of the vine rows, are important aspects of vineyard care. The fertilization of the soil is also largely organic (e.g., with manure)."_

## Differences in Taste?

Scientific studies have shown that there can indeed be differences in the composition of bio wines, which can also affect the taste.

Whether bio wines actually taste different from conventional wines is a topic of ongoing debate. While some wine lovers claim that bio wines have more complex and authentic aromas, others believe that taste is primarily influenced by factors such as grape variety, terroir, and vinification.

According to many bio winemakers, a bio wine brings the diversity of a vineyard into the wine, making it very expressive.
To find out, there's no way around tasting them. **Cheers 🍷**
