---
title: What is a Super Tuscan?
subtitle: Super Tuscans - What makes the famous Italian wines so special?
description: Insights into the history and characteristics of Super Tuscans, the Tuscan wines that have been globally coveted for decades.
tags:
  - supertuscan
  - tuscany
  - italian-wine
date: 2024-10-15T06:03:07.000Z
featured: true
---

Insights into the history and characteristics of Super Tuscans, the Tuscan wines that have been globally coveted for decades.

## **The Tuscan Wine Revolution**

In the 1970s, a small revolution took place in Tuscany – not political, but in the world of wine. At that time, a few Tuscan winemakers decided to break with old traditions and pursue new paths. They wanted to create wines that defied the rigid regulations of Italian wine laws and instead embraced international standards. This decision led to the birth of the Super Tuscans.

The emergence of Super Tuscans was a bold move, spearheaded by winemakers like Marchese Mario Incisa della Rocchetta and the Antinori family. In the 1960s, Incisa della Rocchetta began growing Cabernet Sauvignon in the Bolgheri region, a grape that was barely noticed in Italy at the time. In 1968, he produced the first vintage of the now-legendary **Sassicaia**, initially for private use. Although the wine was classified as a "Vino da Tavola" – a table wine – by Italian law for not adhering to the strict Chianti rules, its quality was immediately evident.

Other groundbreaking wines followed, such as **Tignanello** by the Antinori family, which was first released in 1971. The traditional Sangiovese grape was blended with international varieties like Cabernet Sauvignon and Merlot. These new wines quickly gained international acclaim. The term "Super Tuscans" was eventually coined during a tasting in London in the 1980s to describe these outstanding wines that diverged from the classic Italian ones.

## So, what is a Super Tuscan?

A Super Tuscan is distinguished by a unique balance between elegance and power and can be defined by a few key criteria:

- The wine must be produced in Tuscany.
- The wine is aged in barrique barrels.
- The wine contains less than 70% Sangiovese and includes international varieties like Cabernet Sauvignon, Merlot, and Petit Verdot.

Today, Super Tuscans are recognized under the IGT (Indicazione Geografica Tipica) or DOC (Denominazione di Origine Controllata) labels, which acknowledge their regional origin and quality.

## **The Characteristics of Super Tuscans**

Super Tuscans often exhibit complex aromatics, ranging from dark fruits to spicy notes, and are known for their refined tannin structure. The use of barrique aging adds depth and harmonious oaky notes to the wines.

The popularity of Super Tuscans lies not only in their high quality but also in their uniqueness. While classic Tuscan wines like Chianti adhere to strict regulations, Super Tuscans allow winemakers more freedom to experiment. Many Super Tuscans, such as Sassicaia, Tignanello, and Ornellaia, are now among the most renowned and finest wines in Italy. They stand for top quality, blending Tuscan tradition with modern winemaking techniques.

**Cheers!🍷**
